Considerations for Marriage 

There is no such thing as perfection, but these are some of the important things that I thought about when dating and considering marriage (note: I did not think about it profoundly as I should have, but these are the things that I remember observing): 

    Faith – compatibility is important 

    Is she Catholic? 

    Does she fully practice her Christian faith? 

    Do we share the same moral values/ 

    Will she help me get to heaven? 

 

    Character/Beliefs/Social Behavior – does she have a solid Character with views compatible with yours? 

    Friendly 

    Happy and joyful or a sour attitude? 

    Polite and good Social graces…..ie. able to hold her own at a get together (meet people, engage socially)?   

    Would you be proud of her in social circles …she reflects on you! 

    Knows when to speak and when not to speak? 

    Selfish or charitable? 

    Spoiled and entitled or humble and grateful? 

    Kind or mean-spirited 

    Always critical and complaining or positive can-do attitude? 

    Weak and afraid or has good courage in her convictions….again, not a zealot or arrogant, just a good foundational confidence. 

    Self-effacing or braggart/full of herself? 

    Has she been with lots of boyfriends or generally tame?  Note: not unusual that she may have dated a couple of people, by mid-20s,  but probably a red flag if she has had a bunch of boyfriends. 

    Feminist views eg. Boss-babe, critical of men… or traditional female behavior? 

    Political leanings – socialist, abortion/euthanasia, BLM, LGBTQ, hates America?   This will definitely be a big point of friction if not generally aligned in a household. 

 

    Children – will she be a good Mother and build a good family? 

    Does she want children? How many? Is that aligned with your view? 

    Will she raise her children as true Catholics? 

    Does she really like children or just puts up with them? 

    Do children gravitate to her? 

    Does she exhibit a good heart toward children, nurturing behavior? 

    Do her eyes light up when she sees baby pictures (just one simple sign) or does she like holding babies (another simple sign)? 

 

    Friendship – do you have a great friendship? 

    Do you have fun with her? 

    Does she share some of your interests? 

    Is she set in her ways or is she have a bit of an adventurous spirit – ie.  

    Is she  a princess or willing to get messy…… “outdoors-minded” …. willing to get dirty– camping, hiking, gardening, sports, etc.    

    Does she have varied interests or just stuck on one thing with no interest in learning about new things.   Ie. a bit of an adventurous spirit  (note: I did not want somebody that is bored with everything though and always looking for new highs). 

    Is she creative – eg. Thinking of new things to do? 

    Good, engaging conversations? 

    Open communication or are you careful and guarded? 

    Ability to resolve non-critical differences or points of disagreement amicably? 

    Can you count on them to put their own needs aside to unselfishly do for you (assuming obviously you would do the same for her)? 

    Do you get bored with her, or really enjoy your time together? 

 

    Family and Friends – you are entering long relationships with her family/friends and she is with yours. 

    Does she have a solid family background (she has largely learned about how a family operates by her experience, and likely to emulate that)?  Are her parents married/divorced/separated?   What are the family’s values (eat together, go to church together, loving or angry, committed to each other).   Does the family seem to function well or is it in chaos?   How does she get along with her siblings/grandparent/aunts/uncles?  

    Do you generally enjoy her family’s company or is it very uncomfortable and you wish to avoid being with them? 

    What does her friend group look like (there is a saying….show me your friends and I will see who you are)?   Can you see yourself being friends with them? Wil she put your friends above you? 

    Does she get along well with your family? Do you have fun together, generally enjoy each other’s company?  Does she want to spend time with your family? 

    Does she get along with your friends?  Is she possessive and needy and jealous of the time you spend with your friends? 

    Business Partner – will she be a good business partner and help build a solid financial future together for the family? 

    Saver or spender? 

    Wasteful (eg. buy 50 pairs of shoes with tags on them, throw away a lot of food) 

    High maintenance/expensive tasts or simple/affordable desires? 

    Willing to sacrifice for a better future? 

    Big financial risk taker? 

    Does she have huge debt (eg. School debt, credit card debt)? Does she spend more than she earns? 

    Does she meet her financial obligations – ie. Pay her bills on time, avoids late payments, etc. 

    Is she a self-starter…ie.  Tackles an important project or procrastinates and finds reasons “not” to do it?  

 

    Room-mate – will she make a good room-mate (could be 50+ years living in same house ….. a lot can aggravate in that time)? 

    Is she messy or a slob?   

    Washes and puts away dishes or leaves a pile in the sink for days? 

    Keeps her room clean and neat (clothes folded and put away, bathroom counters clean) 

    Does she do housekeeping…..proper dusting, mopping, vacuuming, etc.) 

    Will she carry her share of the burden of maintaining a home or is she lazy and looking for you to carry the load? 

 

    Physical Attraction 

    Are you attracted to her physically (this is not shallow…..50+ years is a long time…..and this is important….you will be waking up next to her every morning)?   Could be a problem if you are only marginally attracted to her now when things are just starting. 

    Is she fit? (works-out, active lifestyle or couch potato) 

    Does she take care of her health (works out, eats healthy)? 

    Is she clean (days without a shower, brushes her teeth, wears clean clothes, etc… many do not)? 

    Longevity – again, sounds shallow, but you can look at her older siblings, mom, aunts to see if they are fit  